---
layout: post
title: "Fluids"
author: "Samuel Ward"
categories: thoughts
tags: [sample]
image: pic1.jpg
---

First you define the particle distribution function, which is the probability a particle is located within an infinitesimal volume. For a system of finite density, the distribution function will look like a series of delta spikes at points in phase-space where each particles resides. Integrating over the velocity space will give the probability density: 

$$
dn=f(\mathbf{x},\mathbf{v},t)dv_{x}dv_{y}dv_{z}.
$$

Note that this means that the distribution function must be normalised such that integrating over a volume yields the total number of particles within that volume. The volume elements can be arbitrarily large/small. If the volume elements are increased in size, such that many particles lie within them now, then you have a way of expressing the density:

$$
\rho=nm.
$$

If you make this volume of space small enough such that density, temperature or any quantity varies little across it, you can start to model the instantaneous dynamics of these individual volume elements. This is quite confusing. Imagine a volume element of some arbitrary 3D shape that encloses some particles within the fluid. At the instantaneous point you draw this shape, the fluid flows with some motion and carries the shape with it, and the shape may also expand, stretch, rotate, twist etc. It is by modelling this shape, calculating its dynamics at an instantaneous point in time, and repeating across the space for a single moment, that we calculate fluid dynamics.

Continuity of mass density is a condition satisfied for any volume throughout the fluid:

$$
\dot{\rho} + \nabla\cdot(\rho\mathbf{u}) = 0.
$$

which just states the change in density within the volume is equal to the flow of mass out the boundary defining the volume. Expanding, we get

$$
\dot{\rho} + \mathbf{u}\cdot\nabla\rho + \rho\nabla\cdot\mathbf{u} = 0
$$

or 

$$
\frac{D\rho}{Dt} + \rho\nabla\cdot\mathbf{u} = 0
$$

where the first term is the convective derivative. The convective derivative,  

$$
\frac{D}{Dt},
$$

expresses changes in a quantity whilst in the rest frame of the fluid. The second term is the divergence of the fluid flow. If you consider a volume element co-moving with the fluid - "convected" by the fluid - then there is nothing stopping the volume of the element changing as it moves. In fact, the divergence of the fluid velocity at a given point in space specifies the fractional rate of increase in the volume of an infinitesimal co-moving fluid element at that point.



So the previous equation says "the decrease in the density of a moving volume element in time is equal to the divergence of the fluid flow encompassed by that element." The equation before that says that "the decrease in density in a fixed volume element at a given point in space with respect to time is due to the convection of less dense fluid into that element and divergence of fluid out of that element." These are sometimes called the Lagrangian and Eulerian views respectively. Because the density in that volume may change even if there is constant flow through the element if the fluid flowing in is at higher density. Likewise, even if the fluid is constant density throughout, a net flow divergence will lead to a net number of streamlines flowing out of the volume and therefore a net flow of particles out of the volume.

Consider water flowing from a narrow river into a widening estuary. Because water is incompressible in practice, conservation of mass requires that the flow of water is reduced as it along into the widening river. Therefore, there is a gradient in the velocity field of the water. Since the flow is steady, the time derivative of this flow field is zero. On the other hand, the convective derivative is nonzero, capturing the change in velocity experienced by a fluid parcel as it flows along the streamlines.


See my own notes - they're correct. Boosting into the reference frame of the bulk flow, you can see that the convective derivative reduces to the time derivative because u is zero. Therefore, in that case, the time derivative of the density is just the divergence of the velocity in that reference frame.

Newton's law for a particle is

$$
\frac{d}{dt}(m\mathbf{v})=\mathbf{F},
$$

and for a fluid is

$$
\frac{D}{Dt}(\rho\mathbf{v})=\mathbf{F}. 
$$

